"This is the essential, this is the pillar, this is the concluding, this is all the structure of
the meditation, so therefore we should always keep that. Remember that in mind, and with this we go
to the meditation."
"Now, when we go to this meditation in the very 16th, and in 16th that begins here, here I say the
visualizations, here it begins. As I said in Vajrayana teaching, in a minute we already know, we
all heard this many times from our many great teachers, teachers."
Vadiyana teaching is so special. Among all the Buddha's teaching, Vajrayana teaching is known as
the most powerful teaching that immediately connects to the way the nature is, without long delay,
immediately connecting to us, to us, to that nature.
And for example, the basic Buddha's teaching, this process takes a long time to reach to that basic
nature status. Vajrayana takes also long changes, that's what always those great masters in the
teaching said, will take a long time.
And the teaching said, even Mahayana teaching will take three complex eons to reach to the basic
goodness state, or the Buddhahood, the natural status.
Vajrayana teaching, in particular Dzogji teaching, always said, within this lifetime, if you have
the joyful effort, courage and commitment, devotion and bodhicitta, we can reach, or we can reach
enlightenment within 12 years, just less over a decade.
That's all. Let her, two extra years, then one decade. Even every, for example, that child born,
still that child is big enough, tense, right?
Teenagers. Teenagers, still 12 years old. In the teachings, 12 years, you can get enlightenment.
12 years in the teachings, really you put joyful effort, devotion, courage, commitment, devotion
and bodhicitta blended in that whole, just blended in that, feel that in yourself and be in that
state, in the practice.
12 years in this state, you really can get enlightenment. This is Dzogji teaching. Not just
enlightenment pokes up, teaching is a warm song.
A great, one of the great teacher, he reached in transcendental western realm of Bodhi in 12 years.
This is one of the leading examples.
Of course, enlightenment is already, but she reached transcendental western realm of Bodhi. And
those many great masters, really, really, even in his own dungeon, said, just before his birth,
there is one great mastery in his Tibet.
I mean, K.J. Mooji said too, he was very famous. Famous is called Nyala Pima Dandar. He was also
reached transcendental realm of Bodhi, or realm of Bodhi.
Not transcendental, actually, he said, or realm of Bodhi, he reached that status. So this is just
so many. You put that effort, and then of course, the known one pokes up and the other one is the
Manarepas.
And read life through the Manarepas, how he started his life. So ordinary, so casual, so mundane
status, but his courage and commitment, determination, devotion, and Bodhi jata, what did he become
?
He said, you know, and not just that only them, one after another. And all that. One point the Man
arepa said to his student, he said, or they said to him, because when he reach, become such a great
teacher and become all active state of his life,
his students said, Jeju, they said, called Jeju. Jeju, we think, you are not just the only person,
you must be emanation of the Vedaya Dara, or the Buddha Shakyamuni, or someone else, otherwise you
can't be like this.
He said, what a Manarepa asked. He said, oh, that's wonderful. Wonderful you have such a good
devotion to me. So wonderful.
But however, according to the reality level, I began as the only person. And you know how I started
my life with all those difficult struggles. And also I did so many so big, kind of like, un
righteous activities too.
Because of that, I wake up myself, I put courage in commitment, receive the teaching and put that
into my heart and practice diligently for so many years. And that's why I become this.
It's not that I born with Buddha, I born as the Vedaya Dara, but I born as the ordinary person and
become that reason. That tells, if you put the effort and the devotions and both each other,
everyone have that opportunity, everyone might think, going to think, oh, I might be someone else,
or they will think.
It's true. So therefore, this Vedayana teaching is so powerful. And for this reason, for example,
this visualization, always in the Vedaya Mahayana teaching, never mention in the Vedaya
visualization teachings.
Except for some, you can visualize the Buddha right in front and think of the Buddha's person and
meditate, but never taught in the Sukhara Mahayana to be yourself as Vedaya, as Buddha. Be yourself
as the Vedaya Buddha.
For Vedayana, that Buddhahood, we are going to look for three countless eons that immediately we
are transformed. We are in that status. We have become Buddha. We are in that status.
Therefore, in that aspect, Vedayana teaching is so powerful, immediately it is capturing the result
, the achievement of state. Immediately, the Buddhahood is achievement, goal, but will immediately
be in that status.
And that is what one of the great, again, teachings of the Vedayanas. And now this Vedayana
teaching, as you say, divided into efforts, say, two seconds, two principle seconds, regularization
of the creative states and the complete state or the dissolved state of the complete status.
Those are two principle practice. Have I summarized that all kind of like that more laboratory that
in more kind of little bit more, more what is called, also sometimes called yogas.
In that way, these are the four yogas. The first yoga is the Bodhi, the emptiness appearance of the
Bodhi meditation.
The second is the emptiness appearance yoga of the Bodhi meditation or yoga of the Bodhi meditation
of the emptiness and appearance.
And the second is yoga of the emptiness, the sound of speech meditations. Third is yoga of clear
light, luminosity, practices of meditation.
Fourth is all as indestructible primordial wisdom yoga meditations. So these are our four
categories that have been followed.
Now we begin with the first one is Bodhi of yoga of the Bodhi of the appearance, emptiness.